Hydration is one area where ‘fear brings gear’ can occur. If a hiker does not look up environmental cues, such as water availability, during the planning process of a trip they may be more prone to bringing an excess amount of water containers. At max capacity, water will most likely be the heaviest item that you carry. Generally, for 3-season conditions in moderate climates, 2 liters of water capacity is recommended.

A good tip is: 1L water bottle for drinking from, 1L ‘dirty’ container to treat water from. At the water source, take a large drink of treated water (sometimes up to 1L), treat another liter of water into the clean drinking bottle, then refill the dirty 1L bottle. You are now fully hydrated, have 1L ready to drink, and another 1L ready to filter or treat, without carrying any excess nor going ‘stupid light’ and risking dehydration. This is sometimes referred to as "cameling up".

Treating water comes in many forms. The most often cited on /r/ultralight is using a physical water filter which has a nano fiber membrane. Water is filtered from a ‘dirty’ container into a clean one as described above. Besides using a physical water filter, other options involve using a UV light or chemical treatment such as Aquamira. chemical treatments in liquid and tablet form have fallen out of favor despite weighing grams per treatment because of their need of 20 minutes to several hours to render water potable. UV devices have the advantage of rendering viruses inert, but still hold a weight penalty over popular nano filters. Some members of the ultralight and bushcraft communities opt not to filter or purify water and instead drink straight from water sources. Although some sources present lower disease risks than others, danger of infection by giardia, cryptosporidium, and other contagions is a reality for even the most experienced hikers in any wilderness location.